---
layout: post
title: Reading notes and mini review - "Mapmatics" by Paulina Rowińska
---

This is a short post about Paulina Rowińska's *Mapmatics: How We Navigate the
World Through Numbers*. Who is this book for? What did it teach me? Read on to
find out.

![a black and white old plan of a
fort](https://vic-kostrzewski.github.io/images/mapmatics.jpg)

In the past two months, I read not one, but two news stories about two new map
projections. Each of these reports was similar in tone and they both made
similar claims: all the maps in the past were inaccurate, but now, thanks to
**this new map right here**, we might be getting close to having this map
problem of ours sorted.

The maps looked completely different each time, and each of them was hyped as
"finally, the perfect map". This should already be enough to make you stop and
think. They can't both be perfect while being so dissimilar, can they? If
you're in the mood for more meditations and discussions like these, then you
definitely need to read [Paulina Rowińska's
*Mapmatics*](https://www.panmacmillan.com/authors/paulina-rowinska/mapmatics/
9781035007042).

## What is this book like?

No map exists without numbers and maths. Sooner or later, any map anyone makes
will need to start tackling calculations and mathematical problems. And when
the map is finished, the need for maths doesn't stop, either.

In *Mapmatics*, Paulina Rowińska explores this relationship between maps and
mathematics. The book is a readable blend of scientific accounts,
historical explorations, with plenty of illustrations and some calculations
thrown in for good measure. I am not an expert on either maths or cartography -
my interest is that of an amateur enthusiast. I was able to make my way through
most of this book with great interest and without confusion.

*Mapmatics* does a brilliant job of showing us how powerful maps really are.
They help us navigate the increasingly complex everyday landscapes, map the
unknown, and represent things the way we want others to see them. The author is
aware of how a map works in our world: affecting our perception of space,
maths, psychology, and politics. She uses stories and expert voices from each
of these areas to make us appreciate mapmaking, and math-making, all over again.

## What did this book teach me?

I read *Mapmatics* while I was taking a break from a big maths educational
project. I thought the timing wasn't perfect (maths should have been the last
thing on my mind!). Paulina Rowińska's book proved me wrong: the first thing it
showed me was how to write great maths stories.

Yes, there are parts of this book that I skipped. No, it didn't help me get
over my "Cs" in Maths or Geography. That's not why I read it though. The other
benefit of *Mapmatics* was in how it helped me see the connections between the
subject areas it explores. I can now return to the news stories I mentioned at
the start, and read them more critically, seeing through the hype and
questioning the reporters' assumptions.

*Mapmatics* is definitely a bit of an eye-opener. If maps aren't what they seem
- if each map is so deeply affected by maths, politics, psychology, history -
then what else is there? What other stories, images, arrangements would start
to reveal their secrets if we look closely? This Christmas, I definitely needed
a book that would help my curiosity emerge from its hibernation. This was the
one.

## Who is this book for?

This book won't necessarily help you get better maths scores on your tests. And
it may not help you build your first map, either. Similarly, if you are a maths
or maps expert, this may not be anything new (although you're still likely to
appreciate the multidisciplinary way in which the subject areas are
represented).

*Mapmatics* is a perfect gift for the slightly geeky people in your life. My
sailor friends would love it - I remember we learned navigation together. The
engineers / designers in my family might appreciate it for the way it treats
the subjects they're dealing with on a daily basis.

And it may be just what your educator friends need, too. After we leave school,
maths becomes a tricky, elusive thing. Books like *Mapmatics* do a great job of
showing is the importance of mathematical decisions: just because numbers
aren't there for us to crunch, doesn't mean they were never there to begin
with. And if someone did the number-crunching for us, it helps to know their
motivations, too. I wish more maths teachers had the time to teach that.

*Mapmatics* by Paulina Rowińska is published by Picador and available now.

---
![a mini avatar of the
author](https://vic-kostrzewski.github.io/images/minime.png)

**Hi, my name is Vic.** I am a Learning Designer, Digital Producer and
Translator (PL-ENG-PL) currently based in Wales. My professional interests
include instructional design for lifelong learning, serious games, low-tech
digital learning solutions, and translation/transcreation for the video game
industry. I'm always happy to discuss new projects. To get in touch, you can
[email me](mailto:vic_kostrzewski@posteo.com) or [set up a video
call](https://tidycal.com/vickostrzewski/30min).
